Blood travels from your heart
to the rest of your body through arteries
to deliver oxygen and nutrients
before returning to the heart and lungs
through veins to pick up more oxygen.
Veins in the legs and lower body
work against the force of gravity
to return blood to the heart.
The walls of the veins contain valves
to prevent backflow.
Muscles in the legs contract
to squeeze the veins and pump
the blood upward.
Varicose veins are large,
ropey veins in the legs.
They are always expanded because
the vein is having trouble bringing
blood back to the heart.
The veins usually begin to get bigger
because pressure from gravity
pushes down on the column of blood,
and the thin-walled veins are pushed outward,
making them bigger.
Varicose veins are bigger
and contain more blood,
which puts more pressure on the valves
which causes them to fail.
Varicose veins are more common in older people,
because of changes in aging veins.
Veins become less elastic,
so when stretched,
they don’t return to their previous shape.
Valves in older veins weaken or won’t close,
so blood flows backwards and collects in pools.
They appear blue because they’re carrying
blood that is returning to the lungs
that lacks oxygen.